h1. About amqp gem

amqp gem is a simple asynchronous Ruby AMQP client built on top of "EventMachine":http://rubyeventmachine.com.
This library works with Ruby 1.8.7, Ruby 1.9.2, JRuby and Rubinius, and is
licensed under the "Ruby License":http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/LICENSE.txt.
Version 0.8.0 and later of amqp gem implement "AMQP 0.9.1":http://bit.ly/hw2ELX.


h2. What is AMQP?

AMQP is an "open standard for messaging middleware":http://www.amqp.org/confluence/display/AMQP/About+AMQP that
emphasizes interoperability between different technologies (for example, Java, .NET,
Ruby, Python, C and so on).

Key features of AMQP are very flexible yet simple routing and binary protocol
efficiency.


h2. What is amqp gem good for?

One can use amqp gem to make Ruby applications interoperate with other
applications (both Ruby and not). Complexity and size may vary from
simple work queues to complex multi-stage data processing workflows that involve
dozens or hundreds of applications built with all kinds of technologies.

Specific examples:

 * A Web application may route messages to a Java app that works
   with SMS delivery gateways.

 * Periodically run (Cron-driven) application may notify other systems that
   there are some new results.

 * Content aggregators may update full-text search and geospatial search indexes
	 by delegating actual indexing work to other applications over AMQP.

 * Companies may provide "Firehose-like" push APIs to their customers, partners
   or just general public.

 * A new shiny Ruby-based system may be integrated with an existing C++-based component
   using AMQP.

 * An application that watches updates from a real-time stream (be it markets data
   or Twitter stream) can propagate updates to interested parties, including
	 Web applications that display that information in the real time.



h2. Getting started with amqp gem

h3. Install RabbitMQ

Please refer to "RabbitMQ installation guide":http://www.rabbitmq.com/install.html


h3. Install the gem

<pre>gem install amqp</pre>


h3. "Hello, World" example

<pre>
#!/usr/bin/env ruby
# encoding: utf-8

#!/usr/bin/env ruby
# encoding: utf-8

require "rubygems"
require 'amqp'

EventMachine.run do
  AMQP.connect(:host => 'localhost') do |connection|
    puts "Connected to AMQP broker"

    channel  = AMQP::Channel.new(connection)
    queue    = channel.queue("amqpgem.examples.hello_world")
    exchange = channel.default_exchange

    queue.subscribe do |payload|
      puts "Received a message: #{payload}. Disconnecting..."

      connection.close {
        EM.stop { exit }
      }
    end

    exchange.publish "Hello, world!", :routing_key => queue.name
  end  
end
</pre>

(see "as a Gist":https://gist.github.com/910211)


h2. How to use AMQP gem with Ruby on Rails, Merb, Sinatra and other web frameworks

To use AMQP gem from web applications, you would need to have EventMachine reactor running.
If you use [Thin](http://code.macournoyer.com/thin/), you are all set: Thin uses EventMachine under
the hood.

With other web servers, you need to start EventMachine reactor in it's own thread like this:

<pre>Thread.new { EM.run }</pre>

because otherwise EventMachine will block current thread. Then connect to AMQP broker:

<pre>amqp_connection = AMQP.connect(:host => "localhost", :user => "guest", :pass => "guest", :vhost => "/")</pre>

In a Ruby on Rails app, probably the best place for this code is initializer
(like config/initializers/amqp.rb). For Merb apps, it is config/init.rb. For
Sinatra and pure Rack applications, place it next to other configuration
code.

If you want to integrate AMQP with "Thin":http://code.macournoyer.com/thin/, "Goliath":http://www.igvita.com/2011/03/08/goliath-non-blocking-ruby-19-web-server/ or another EventMachine-based software
which already runs an event loop, you might want to use following code:

<pre>EM.next_tick { AMQP.connect(...) }</pre>

So in case the reactor isn't running yet (which seems to be the case with Ruby on Rails 3.x and Thin combination),
it won't fail, but wait when the reactor is started.

Same separate thread technique can be used to make EventMachine play nicely with other
libraries that would block current thread (like "File::Tail":http://rubygems.org/gems/file-tail).


h2. Using amqp gem in your app/library using Bundler

With Bundler, add this line to your Gemfile:

<pre>gem "amqp"</pre>

If you want to use edge version (usually there is no need to):

<pre>
gem "amqp", :git => "git://github.com/ruby-amqp/amqp.git", :branch => "master"
</pre>



h2. Examples

You can find many examples (both real-world cases and simple demonstrations)
"under examples directory":https://github.com/ruby-amqp/amqp/tree/master/examples in the repository.


h2. How does amqp gem relate to amq-client gem, amq-protocol and libraries like bunny?

See "this page about AMQP gems family":https://github.com/ruby-amqp/amq-client/blob/master/README.textile


h2. How can I learn more?

h3. AMQP resources

 * "RabbitMQ tutorials":http://www.rabbitmq.com/getstarted.html that demonstrate interoperability
 * "Wikipedia page on AMQP":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Message_Queuing_Protocol
 * "AMQP quick reference":http://www.rabbitmq.com/amqp-0-9-1-quickref.html
 * John O'Hara on the "history of AMQP":http://www.acmqueue.org/modules.php?name=Content&pa=showpage&pid=485

h3. Messaging and distributed systems resources

 * "Enterprise Integration Patterns":http://www.eaipatterns.com/, a book about messaging and use of messaging in systems integration.

 * "A Critique of the Remote Procedure Call Paradigm":http://www.cs.vu.nl/~ast/publications/euteco-1988.pdf
 * "A Note on Distributed Computing":http://research.sun.com/techrep/1994/smli_tr-94-29.pdf
 * "Convenience Over Correctness":http://steve.vinoski.net/pdf/IEEE-Convenience_Over_Correctness.pdf
 * Joe Armstrong on "Erlang messaging vs RPC":http://armstrongonsoftware.blogspot.com/2008/05/road-we-didnt-go-down.html


h2. Community

 * "Ruby AMQP mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/ruby-amqp
 * "RabbitMQ mailing list":https://lists.rabbitmq.com/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/rabbitmq-discuss (AMQP community epicenter).
 * "Jabber room for contributors":xmpp://amqp-dev@conf.netlab.cz


h2. License

AMQP gem is licensed under the "Ruby License:"http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/LICENSE.txt.


h2. Credits and copyright information

* The Original Code is "tmm1/amqp":http://github.com/tmm1/amqp.
* The Initial Developer of the Original Code is Aman Gupta.
* Copyright (c) 2008 - 2010 "Aman Gupta":http://github.com/tmm1.
* Contributions from "Jakub Stastny":http://github.com/botanicus are Copyright (c) 2011 VMware, Inc.
* Copyright (c) 2010 — 2011 "ruby-amqp":https://github.com/ruby-amqp group members.

Currently maintained by "ruby-amqp":https://github.com/ruby-amqp group members
Special thanks to Dmitriy Samovskiy, Ben Hood and Tony Garnock-Jones.



h2. FAQ

h3. So, does amqp gem only work with RabbitMQ?

This library was tested primarily with "RabbitMQ":http://rabbitmq.com, although it should be compatible with any
server implementing the "AMQP 0.9.1 spec":http://bit.ly/hw2ELX. For AMQP 0.8.0 brokers,
use version 0.7.


h2. Links

* "API Documentation":http://rdoc.info/github/ruby-amqp/amq-protocol/master/frames
* "Examples":https://github.com/ruby-amqp/amq-protocol/tree/master/examples/
* "Issue tracker":http://github.com/ruby-amqp/amq-protocol/issues
* "Continous integration server":http://travis-ci.org/#!/ruby-amqp/amqp