# @title Ruby amqp gem: AMQP 0.9.1 Model Explained

h1. AMQP 0.9.1 Model Explained

h2. About this guide

This guide explains AMQP 0.9.1 Model used by RabbitMQ. Understanding the AMQP Model will make a lot of other documentation, both for the Ruby amqp gem and
RabbitMQ itself, easier to follow.

This guide covers:

 * High-level overview of the AMQP 0.9.1 Model.
 * Key differences of the AMQP model from some other messaging models.
 * What are exchanges.
 * What are queues.
 * What are bindings.
 * How AMQP protocol is structured. What are AMQP methods.
 * What attributes AMQP 0.9.1 messages have.
 * What are message acknowledgements.
 * What are negative message acknowledgements.
 * and a lot of other things.


h2. Which versions of the amqp gem does this guide cover?

This guide covers v0.8.0 and later of the Ruby amqp gem.


h2. High-level overview of the AMQP 0.9.1 Model

h3. Brokers & Their Role

AMQP a networking protocol, the Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP), which enables conforming client applications to communicate with conforming
messaging middleware brokers. Brokers receive messages from _producers_ (applications that publish them) and route them to _consumers_ (applications
that process them).

Brokers are centers of the nervous system, applications are more like limbs.


h3. AMQP 0.9.1 Model, briefly

AMQP 0.9.1 Model has the following view of the world: messages are published by producers to _exchanges_, often compared to post offices or mailboxes. Exchanges then
distribute message copies to _queues_ using rules called _bindings_. Then AMQP brokers either push messages to consumers subscribed to some queues, or consumers
fetch/pull messages from queues on demand, as needed.


TBD


h2. Key differences from some other messaging models

TBD


h2. AMQP Exchanges and Exchange Types.

TBD


h2. AMQP Queues.

TBD


h2. AMQP Bindings.

TBD


h2. AMQP Message Consumers.

TBD


h2. AMQP Channels.

TBD


h2. AMQP Virtual Hosts (vhosts).

TBD



h2. Wrapping up

This is the end of the AMQP 0.9.1 Model tutorial. Congratulations! Armed with this knowledge, you will find it easy to follow the rest of
the amqp gem documentation as well as rabbitmq.com documentation and "rabbitmq-discuss mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/rabbitmq-discuss

To stay up to date with amqp gem development, "follow @rubyamqp on Twitter":http://twitter.com/rubyamqp and "join our mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/ruby-amqp.




h2. What to read next

Documentation is organized as a number of {file:docs/DocumentationGuidesIndex.textile documentation guides}, covering all kinds of
topics from {file:docs/Exchanges.textile use cases for various exchange types} to {file:docs/ErrorHandling.textile error handling} and
{file:docs/VendorSpecificExchanges.textile Broker-specific AMQP 0.9.1 extensions}.

We recommend that you read the following guides next, if possible, in this order:

 * {file:docs/ConnectingToTheBroker.textile Connection to the broker}. This guide explains how to connect to an AMQP broker and how to integrate the amqp gem into standalone and Web applications.
 * {file:docs/Queues.textile Working With Queues}. This guide focuses on features that consumer applications use heavily.
 * {file:docs/Exchanges.textile Working With Exchanges}. This guide focuses on features that producer applications use heavily.
 * {file:docs/PatternsAndUseCases.textile Patterns & Use Cases}. This guide focuses implementation of "common messaging patterns":http://www.eaipatterns.com/ using AMQP Model features as building blocks.
 * {file:docs/ErrorHandling.textile Error Handling & Recovery}. This guide explains how to handle protocol errors, network failures and other things that may go wrong in real world projects.

If you are migrating your application from earlier versions of the amqp gem (0.6.x and 0.7.x), to 0.8.x and later, there is the
{file:docs/08Migration.textile amqp gem 0.8 migration guide}.


h2. Tell us what you think!

Please take a moment to tell us what you think about this guide "on Twitter":http://twitter.com/rubyamqp or the "Ruby AMQP mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/ruby-amqp.
 Let us know what was unclear or what has not been covered. Maybe you do not like the guide style or grammar or discover spelling mistakes. Reader feedback is
key to making the documentation better.

If, for some reason, you cannot use the communication channels mentioned above, you can "contact the author of the guides directly":mailto:michael@novemberain.com?subject=amqp%20gem%20documentation


<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script type="text/javascript">
    /* * * CONFIGURATION VARIABLES * * */
    var disqus_shortname = 'rubyamqpdocs'; // required: replace example with your forum shortname

    var disqus_developer = 0; // set to 1 on local machine for testing comments
    var disqus_identifier = 'amqp_connecting_to_the_broker';
    var disqus_url = 'http://rdoc.info/github/ruby-amqp/amqp/master/file/docs/GettingStarted.textile';

    /* * * DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE * * */
    (function() {
        var dsq = document.createElement('script'); dsq.type = 'text/javascript'; dsq.async = true;
        dsq.src = 'http://' + disqus_shortname + '.disqus.com/embed.js';
        (document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0] || document.getElementsByTagName('body')[0]).appendChild(dsq);
    })();
</script>
