# @title Ruby AMQP gem: RabbitMQ versions compatibility

h1. Ruby amqp gem and RabbitMQ versions compatibility

h2. This Documentation Has Moved to rubyamqp.info

amqp gem documentation guides are now hosted on "rubyamqp.info":http://rubyamqp.info.

h2. About this guide

This guide covers compatibility of the "Ruby amqp gem":http://github.com/ruby-amqp/amqp with various versions of "RabbitMQ":http://rabbitmq.com messaging broker.



h2. Covered versions

This guide covers "Ruby amqp gem":http://github.com/ruby-amqp/amqp v0.8.0 and later.


h2. RabbitMQ Version Requirement

amqp gem before 0.8.0 (0.6.x, 0.7.x) series implemented (most of) AMQP 0.8 specification. amqp gem 0.8.0 implements AMQP 0.9.1 and thus
*requires RabbitMQ version 2.0 or later*. See {file:docs/RabbitMQVersions.textile RabbitMQ versions} for more information about
RabbitMQ versions support and how obtain up-todate packages for your operating system.

<span class="note">
amqp gem 0.8.0 and later versions implement AMQP 0.9.1 and thus *requires RabbitMQ version 2.0 or later*
</span>



h2. Using recent versions on Debian and Ubuntu

Ubuntu (even 10.10) and Debian both "ship with an old RabbitMQ version":http://packages.ubuntu.com/maverick/rabbitmq-server,
that only supports AMQP protocol 0.8. Ruby amqp gem 0.8.0 and later *will not work with RabbitMQ versions before 2.0.0*.

We strongly recommend that you use "RabbitMQ apt repository":http://www.rabbitmq.com/debian.html#apt that has recent versions of RabbitMQ.



h2. OpsCode Chef & Puppet

h3. Chef cookbook for RabbitMQ

There is a "Chef cookbook for RabbitMQ":https://github.com/opscode/cookbooks/tree/master/rabbitmq that installs recent versions from
the rabbitmq.com apt repository. It also has LWPRs (providers) for managing users and vhosts.


h3. RabbitMQ Puppet module

There is a "RabbitMQ Puppet module":https://github.com/puppetlabs/puppetlabs-rabbitmq by the Puppet Labs team. It uses .deb packages from
Debian testing and unstable repositories. Note that it has two dependencies:

 * "puppet-stdlib":https://github.com/puppetlabs/puppetlabs-stdlib
 * "puppet-apt":https://github.com/puppetlabs/puppet-apt



h2. TLS (SSL) support

Note that "before 1.7.0, RabbitMQ did not support TLS":http://www.rabbitmq.com/ssl.html. In order to have TLS
support, RabbitMQ 1.7.0 requires

 * Erlang/OTP R13B or later
 * Erlang SSL 3.10 or later

and recommends using Erlang R141B that ships with Erlang SSL 4.0.1. Learn more in our {file:docs/ConnectionEncryptionWithTLS.textile Using TLS (SSL)} guide.


h2. Authors

This guide was written by "Michael Klishin":http://twitter.com/michaelklishin and edited by "Chris Duncan":https://twitter.com/celldee.



h2. Tell us what you think!

Please take a moment and tell us what you think about this guide "on Twitter":http://twitter.com/rubyamqp or "Ruby AMQP mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/ruby-amqp:
what was unclear? what wasn't covered? maybe you don't like guide style or grammar and spelling are incorrect? Readers feedback is
key to making documentation better.

If mailing list communication is not an option for you for some reason, you can "contact guides author directly":mailto:michael@novemberain.com?subject=amqp%20gem%20documentation


<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script type="text/javascript">
    /* * * CONFIGURATION VARIABLES * * */
    var disqus_shortname = 'rubyamqpdocs'; // required: replace example with your forum shortname

    var disqus_developer = 0; // set to 1 on local machine for testing comments
    var disqus_identifier = 'amqp_rabbitmq_versions';
    var disqus_url = 'http://rdoc.info/github/ruby-amqp/amqp/master/file/docs/RabbitMQVersions.textile';

    /* * * DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE * * */
    (function() {
        var dsq = document.createElement('script'); dsq.type = 'text/javascript'; dsq.async = true;
        dsq.src = 'http://' + disqus_shortname + '.disqus.com/embed.js';
        (document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0] || document.getElementsByTagName('body')[0]).appendChild(dsq);
    })();
</script>
